the fundamental question of contrasting
determinism
to so-called free will is of whether or
not
a person is making a decision
at all more broadly do we live in a
universe
where people and sentient animals
are making decisions all the time or do
we live in a universe
where nobody and nothing is making a
decision
ever where all of the decisions they
seem to make
are predetermined have been determined
in fact
since the creation of the universe by
the laws of physics
and the whole process of decision making
imagining
even innovation even dreaming even
reverie
all of these psychological processes are
just as
automated as the formation
of salt crystals in a cave now it's a
beautiful image
isn't it you're seeing on screen right
now mind-blowing
formations of salt crystals in a cave i
think you could
put yourself in the shoes of an ancient
or medieval person
who walks into a miraculous cave of this
kind
and who thinks this must be created
by some architect some god
some divine intelligence must have made
these crystals but today even the most
devoutly religious
among us except that no wonders of the
world like this
develop without anyone making a decision
without a plan
without imagination or innovation right
this is just the mindless automated
unfolding of the laws of
physics chemistry so on and so forth and
the beautiful and enticing vision of the
world
that the determinists invite you to
believe in is that everything
in your life despite what you may
agonize over about the decisions you
made in your life
is just like the salt crystals in this
cave
so when i reflect back on the loves
i have lost when i reflect back on women
i chose not to have sex with i can
regard that deeply personal
peculiar decision i made at that time
the
emotional and ethical conflicted
feelings i had at that time as something
that has the same
geometric simplicity
as the formation of these salt crystals
in the cave
whether i fell in love with one woman or
another whether i slept with one woman
or another
that was in this same sense determined
wow what an inspirational world view
unfortunately the nature of that world
view is
religious not scientific
so is a person making a decision well no
despite all the evidence that you really
are making a decision
this is in fact an illusion so let's
emphasize
they recognize that there's empirical
evidence
that we are making decisions right
they're discounting or discarding
that evidence by claiming it's an
illusion this is common to many
religions ancient and modern it's a
common
line of thought in both hinduism and
buddhism although not
the most orthodox form of ancient
teravata buddhism and it was reproduced
in christian garb
by what is called christian science
christian science is basically a cult
group
nothing really scientific about it but
they interestingly they regard their own
thesis that the world as you perceive it
is just an illusion as a
scientific fact or scientific discovery
of course it's a scientific discovery
they prove by quoting the gospels but
that's another story well you know this
illusion
we can prove that it is such because
we're all just made out of
particles like a tornado if the tornado
were sentient
it would perceive itself as making
decisions even though it's just
an effect of external causes this type
of imagery i think
was uh innovated by the philosopher
arthur schopenhauer
if he wasn't the first to say this sort
of thing he certainly was someone who
said it
an impressively long time ago if in
ancient
times or medieval times your house were
destroyed
by a tornado and there's another house
next door that is
not impacted by the tornado in any way
this still happens to this day it still
happens on video camera you can see it
it's part of the
strange wonder of life on planet earth
the way tornadoes
whirl around and leave some buildings
untouched others utterly devastated
it would be easy to convince yourself
that the tornado is making decisions or
that it is guided by some kind of
god or demon that has a plan and has
definite intentions
that that some entity made the
intelligent decision
that one house should be destroyed and
another left untouched so there's a
sense in which this type of determinist
analysis
can be meaningfully applied to salt
crystals and tornadoes
the question is how or why would anyone
arrive at the conclusion
that everything in life everything
intellectual
artistic emotional all
decisions are in the same way comparable
to assault crystal
or um the action of a tornado so
step one is this philosophy of
illusionism the proponents of this view
claim that everything you can observe
and experience
in human and animal behavior is
an illusion so we are discounting a
mountain of empirical evidence
in order to instead focus our attention
on a
molehill number two they make
cosmological
claims they claim that all decision
making
all imagination all creativity etc only
happened
and only could have happened at the
moment
of the creation of the universe if this
isn't a religious idea
what is so returning to my first slide
here for one second i asked the question
is a person making a decision yes or no
another way to phrase this would be are
human beings
capable of innovation of imagination
of arbitrary and original creativity
creativity and decision making are
overlapping
domains we have the explicit claim here
from the determinists
that nobody invents anything nobody
imagines anything nobody innovates
anything
all of that creativity is reserved for
this
one magical moment at the creation of
the universe and you merely have
the illusion that you're thinking of
something new
creating something new innovating to you
in the same way that you have the
illusion
that you're making decisions now if that
is not a religious idea
what is so you may think that you are an
architect you came up with something new
that changed the world but you're not
you are just a passive passenger
you are just an observer of the
unfolding of the grand
transcendental design that was all set
in place
at the beginning of the universe let me
just digress to talk about
the physical reality of what we call
imagination
dreaming and thus by extension also
things like decision making
that only exists in the form
of a wet human brain
what we call digestion only exists
in the form of a wet and squishy
long intestine small intestine stomach
etc
how could you possibly convince me that
the only true
digestion happened at the moment
of the creation of the universe it
doesn't actually occur in your stomach
in your long intestine here and now
how could you convince me that all of
the dreaming all of the imagination all
of the creativity
and all the decision making took place
at the moment the creation universe and
that it isn't happening now
merely in our squishy brains merely as a
biological process a process that is
really no more mysterious
than the type of imagination innovation
decision making
that we can observe animals engaged in
right we have a whole science
of looking at the behavior of animals
right that's quite a weak argument
but again people believe in it because
it is inspirational
because that is religious quality
finally there's the issue of decision
making itself
a great deal of circular reasoning is
employed when they have to speak
on decision making specifically so i
notice
when the other side is presenting their
case this is minimized
the process of decision making is
described in terms of their cosmology
their view of the world as an illusion
but they will not
use palpable examples contrasting a
decision
to a non-decision they won't show us the
criteria
whereby we establish something to be
determined
as opposed to being decided by ourselves
or animals
what i have seen emerge just in the last
10 years
is the reliance on this materialistic
assertion that no decisions could
possibly be made
that human beings couldn't possibly have
something like imagination
innovation dreams or reverie of their
own accord
because we're all just made of atoms
the claim that everything is made of
atoms would only be significant
in this debate if we believed one that
being made of atoms is incompatible
with decision making or that it's
incompatible with imagination etc
or two that atoms differentiate
determined from non-determined phenomena
this whole line of argument is
profoundly irrelevant
to what we're supposedly debating here
the fact that they perceive it as
relevant
is very strange indeed it could only be
because you're negating
a view that decisions are made by a
transcendental
soul by something that's made of a
magical substance that is not comprised
of atoms
if that were the view you were refuting
then
obviously this would this would have
some sailings to debate but if you're
talking to someone like me
and i represent the vast majority of
people in 21st century
someone who takes the pragmatic attitude
that digestion is something that happens
in a stomach
and the long intestines in the small
intestines and there is no such thing as
digestion in the absence of those organs
and we look at human intelligence
and animal intelligence also as
something that takes place in a
brain or a bunch of uh ganglia of
neurons and axons however
you know precisely you want to put it
under a microscope sure we look at
you know this concatenation of complex
physical factors
what do you mean of course we know
that's made out of atoms we were never
in any doubt
that just as digestion exists in your
stomach
on this material basis intelligence
thinking imagination
decision making that exists in your
mushy wet
brain and doesn't rely on some external
transcendental
or divine cause uh to explain its
function
this isn't the 14th century anymore what
can i tell you the greatest concession
i can give to the other side is that
this line of reasoning
makes some sense if we're talking about
tornadoes to make the claim that
tornadoes are just made up of so many
particles so many atoms
and you know a certain amount of motion
provided by
the temperature and the wind cloud
formations you can
analyze piece by piece what comprises a
tornado
in order to refute the view that a
tornado is
sentient intelligent or making decisions
but
why is it that the other side is
incapable of admitting
that within the sciences without even
reaching as far as philosophy
this same line of reasoning would not
establish
that the human mind behaves like a
tornado nor that
dog intelligence or raven intelligence
or even ant intelligence
can be in this way mechanistically
reduced to
a number of particles caught up in a
vortex
but to be clear this line of reasoning
is only meaningful
when it is negating the opposite opposed
position
only if you actually knew someone who
believed that a tornado had intelligence
or a spirit or a soul or was guided by
some kind of divine demiurge only in
that context could this possibly be
meaningful
it's also noteworthy the extent to which
these people rely
on circular reasoning something they
should be
sensitive to given their background in
the sciences so this woman
claims that you perceive yourself as
making decisions
because the process of making decisions
is a type of calculation
during the calculation she says you do
not know the outcome of the decision
because if you did know it there would
be no reason to do the calculation the
first place oh
i'm sorry weren't we answering the
question of whether or not a person
is making a decision at all this is
profoundly irrelevant
precisely because of circular reasoning
she is in fact
referring to the process of making a
decision as a foregone conclusion as
something already proven and established
and indeed we all experience it
empirically
we can even empirically observe it in
the behavior of animals she's accepting
that people
do make decisions in problematizing how
they perceive
and experience those decisions but as
such
she is in fact taking an
anti-determinist position in the process
of defending
determinism now naturally of all the
imbeciles
to engage in this type of fallacious
reasoning sam harris
is the most ridiculous of all after
giving us
a uh i don't know chilling description
of
some rapists and murderers he then says
whether criminals like these can be
trusted honestly report their feelings
and intentions is not the point
whatever their conscious motives these
men
cannot know why they are as they are
nor can we account for why we are not
like them
as sickening as i find their behavior i
have to admit
that if i were to trade places with one
of these men adam for adam
i would be him there is no extra part of
me
that could decide to see the world
differently or resist the impulse to
victimize other people
to murder and rape other people so his
claim is that if he were
adam for adam identical to these rapists
and murderers
he would himself be a rapist and
what what possible meaning could that
have
except for unless you're negating a
counter-opposed
view from medieval christianity that
what human intelligence
or morality or decision-making consists
in is some kind of magical soul
unless you believe there is a spirit
floating above your head that actually
makes those decisions
and therefore this atom by adam
reasoning is
shocking and disruptive to the
assumptions you've grown up with this is
just
totally utterly irrelevant to the
question of decision making
oh so g sam you're saying that if you
were the same guy
you would have made the same decision do
you not see that that's a begging the
question
fallacy that's a pitiful principia
fallacy because the question we were
asking was
who makes the decision who decides if
you're accepting
he decides you decide if you were him
you would make the same decision
you are still accepting the premise that
you decide and therefore
you are not a determinist therefore you
are abandoning the view
that the whole universe just exists on
the same basis as the formation of
salt crystals in a cave in order to
defend that position
now in coming back briefly to this
question i've asked if
this isn't a religion what is let me
just mention my earlier video
on the secure wharf hypothesis there are
examples
and examples in the modern world here
and now where
ideas that originated in religion
even ideas that originated in fringe
cult groups
came to be regarded as science some of
you may think i'm being insincere or
over the top when i put forward this
warning
that religious ideas can infest the
sciences
and that scientific ideas can be
fundamentally insane
in the same way as the religious
mentality the example of the superior
warf hypothesis
is also very instructive indeed so
is a person making a decision yes
or no if your answer is no you either
believe that something else is
compelling the decision
or that nothing at all compels it like
the formation of salt crystals without
any intelligence or decision making
guiding that pattern we live in a world
of wonders we live in a world of
awesome inspiring phenomena like
tornadoes and these soul crystals that
you see
in this cave right now but the role of
the sciences in our lives
fundamentally is one of problem solving
the sciences do not exist to provide us
with
uplifting motivating myths the sciences
certainly do not exist to guide us in
ethical and political questions
and that is precisely what the
proponents of determinism have been
doing
they present ethical arguments they
present political
and legal arguments they even argue for
how this will help you live a more
meaningful and more rewarding life
on the basis of this claim that
everything all your most
private thoughts decisions ambitions are
not things that you decide for yourself
are not things that you imagine or
innovate for yourself
but are things that you passively
observe unfolding
that were established and decided for
you
at the moment of the creation of the
universe
if that is not a religious worldview
what is